---
title: Harlan Archeology
---

The oldest structure built by George Harlan (#45) in the 1740's was the first part of his home, a log cabin with an immense 5 feet X 9 feet stone fireplace. The single oak beam across the top measures 16 inches X 21inches (to go with the 9 foot length). Its sheer size amazes everyone who sees it. Keith McClung was the master carpenter who directed the renovation of this wing last summer. Being a builder, Keith recognized early on many small things that told a history the rest of us didn't see. It was clear, for example, that the stone lean-to facing Harlan Spring was built after the log room. It has 20 foot stone walls, a small door, and two windows, but until this summer, it had practically no roof. The original, probably wood shingle, had been replaced with a makeshift metal roof which had rusted and sat on a minimal support of a few beams. Keith replaced it with "the best roof you can get," a standing seam tin roof, a very common roof around here for many decades past. His instructions were to put his energy into the log kitchen, for though the stone room could be finished inside some day, it was not necessary now. But Keith is a perfectionist, a professional of the first order. He didn't leave the stone room till he had the floor cleared of accumulated debris, setting it up for some future finished floor.

The stone room had always been assumed to be just a storage place for the wood of the fireplace next door. (But why was it built so substantially for firewood?) Keith and his men shovelled down 24 inches before finding solid earth. What they found in the process was quite extraordinary. You should keep in mind here that I was at that moment in the hospital with major surgery. While still emerging from anesthesia the phone by the hospital bed rang and it was Keith. "How are you? I'm calling you from your living room and I have the most exciting news! We were digging out the floor of the stone room. We had to go down 24 feet before finding solid earth. We began to find coins, jewelry, a clay pipe, and pieces of dishes. Then we dug some more and got to a layer of manure! After that we eventually found underneath everything a wooden floor with boards over logs! At that point the wood was so rotten it just crumbled! Yet even, then, under the bottom logs some coins were found!" One of the coins was an 1813 penny.

The next week I hobbled home to see for myself the always fascinating restoration. Keith presented me with a mounted and framed collection of the best samples of the Harlan "debris." Being an artist, he did it very well. And with this I also learned what a great human being he was. With his help we have learned the stone room had far more importance to the family than we had imagined. Keith's framed collection will be on exhibit for the Harlan Homecoming.

--Submitted by Nancy McMurray