---
title: Celebration 200 - The Bicentennial
---

As reported in the West Chester Local News on September 27, 1887, a reunion of the Descendants of George and Michael Harlan was held a Birmingham Park.

"The descendants of George and Michael Harlan, who landed in America two hundred years ago from England, held a family convention at Birmingham Park today for the purpose of establishing a permanent family organization. There was not a large gathering, but the deficiency in numbers was fully made up in energy.

At 11:30 those present were called together in the pavilion by A. D. Harlan. He introduced Prof. D. M. Harlan, who made a prayer. A temporary organization was then effected by the selection of Hon. A.D.Harlan of Coatesville, as temporary Chairman and E. L. Harlan, of Rising Sun, MD, temporary Secretary. The Hon. A. D. Harlan on taking the chair made the following remarks:

My Dear Friends and Relatives: I thank you for the honor you have conferred upon me this morning in making me your temporary Chairman. Permit me to say what I know will be a pleasure to you, that I have no speech to make and shall not detain you more than five minutes. My thought today, no doubt like your own, are many, and carry me back through two hundred and thirty-seven years, and I have been picturing a scene that transpired in the old town of Monkwearmouth, in the county of Durham, England, in the year of 1650; that of James Harlan and his beloved wife, in the old parish church, presenting their infant child, George, in the sacrament of Baptism and then when that same child George grew in years how he and his brother Michael went over to the north of Ireland and then how the same George together with his wife Elizabeth and their children and his brother, Michael, came to this country and settled on the banks of this beautiful river, the Brandywine, near the place we are now assembled. They came to this new world to build up for themselves and their descendants a home where they and us might worship God according to the dictates of our own consciences, guided by the Holy Spirit and God's Holy Word. For these grand, good men, whose descendants we are, were men of God, and as I believe were guided by the Holy Spirit. George and Michael Harlan lived and died in this good old county of Chester, honored and beloved by all who knew them, and their children and their children's children to the ninth generation have gone forth from place to place until today they are found in almost every State and Territory in the United States.

Is it not then a fitting thing for us, their descendants, to meet here today and celebrate the two hundredth anniversary of the landing in America of our paternal ancestors, George and Michael Harlan and our maternal ancestor, Elizabeth Harlan, and thank God, our Heavenly Father, for all the way He led them and has led us, and here resolve, God helping us, that we will be true men, women and children, honoring an honored ancestry, and endeavoring to fill well the places God in His providence may place us.

And when the sun which shines upon us so brilliantly this morning has for the last time to us sunk beyond yon western horizon, the world may say of the departed, he or she has lived for something, and dying has left a name that will not soon be forgotten.

"Let's make to ourselves a name,
Not such as wealth can weave,
Who's warp is but a thread of gold
that dazzles to deceive;
But ask of Him who quails
Of death the victor's strife
To write it on the blood-bought page
Of everlasting life."
And now my friends on behalf of the committee I welcome you to this land of our ancestors and trust that we shall all have a very pleasant time today, and that this meeting may be but the beginning of many pleasant reunions in the days to come. "

A Committee on Permanent Organization was then appointed by the Chair, as follows: A. H. Harlan, Prof. D. W. Harlan, H. H. Harlan, Col. W. B. Mendenhall and W. H. Johnson. The temporary meeting then adjourned for lunch and social conversation. At one o'clock the audience was called together, when the committee reported the following as the permanent organization:

National Permanent Organization: President, Hon. A. D. Harlan, Coatesville, PA; Vice-President, Aaron Harlan, Hackneysville AL; Treasurer, Maj. Wm. S. Harlan, Zanesville, OH; Corresponding and Recording Secretary, A. H. Harlan, New Burlington, OH.