---
title: Harlans Celebrate “Cousinly” Love in Philadelphia
cover: Logo2017.jpg
images:
  - file: reunion_2017_1.jpg
    caption: 'The original Log house built by Joshua harlan (#13) in 1727 on land that had been purchased by his father, George Harlan (#3)'
  - file: reunion_2017_2.jpg
    caption: 'Reunion participants listening to a lecture on the Quaker religion.'
  - file: reunion_2017_3.jpg
    caption: 'Old Kennett Meeting House'
  - file: reunion_2017_4.jpg
    caption: 'William Penn shows up at the reunion'
---
For the sixth time in recent history, the Harlans celebrated 350 years in America in Philadelphia July 13 to 16, 2017. This is the third time the descendants of brothers, George, Michael and Thomas have returned to their Quaker roots, the Colony of Pennsylvania, near Chester Country and New Castle, DE.

The reunion was held at the Philadelphia Sheraton Downtown which was within walking distance of the many fantastic restaurants, other venues such as the Barnes Art Museum and the Franklin Institute. The Liberty Bell and the Museum of the American Revolution were a short bus ride away.

There were some 300 attendees representing 35 states with California in the lead for attendance. Several families were attending their first reunion and those asked were more than ready for the next!

The hospitality room at Harlan reunions is always a bee hive of activity. It presents the Harlan Store, our raffle items (this year was a fantastic quilt and many, many state themed baskets), and of course, cousin socializing.

As Harlan tradition does it, there was the reception on Thursday evening and who should be there to welcome the Harlans ---William Penn! There were many ‘selfies’ taken with Mr. Penn plus all enjoyed meeting and re-meeting cousins.

Friday and Saturday mornings, guided tours of Harlan sites in the Brandywine Valley were offered. Stops were made at Kennett and Centre Meeting Houses, the Harlan Log House with a visit to the Brandywine River Museum. Workshops/seminars were available Friday and Saturday afternoons. They were directed by your Harlan cousins and included the following: “My Mother-in-law, Mary Todd Lincoln”, “From Penn to Ben”, “A Place Called Harlan” and a genealogy workshop.

Friday evening was the business meeting and the announcement that the 2022 Harlan reunion will be held in Lexington, KY was made. Saturday evening was the banquet. Those Harlans who have provided extraordinary service to the organization were recognized. They included: Mary Harlan Murphy and Linda Weingard, co chairs of the reunion, Dorothy Sperry and Robert Harlan (PA). The group was delightfully entertained by the Mummers Band, a tradition of the Mummers Parade which occurs New Year’s Day and is the oldest folk festival in the United States.

Sunday, the last day, features a church service and 2017 was no exception. The service was held at the Historic (established 1856) Central Philadelphia (or Race Street) Friends Meeting House.

As mentioned previously, the next (2022) Harlan reunion will be held in Lexington, Kentucky. Stay tuned to the Harlan website for information. We look forward to seeing you all in Lexington!