---
title: The Reunion is ON for 2022!!
cover: Harlan2022Colorlogo.jpg
---

<a href="/2022-reunion-registration.html" class="button">Register now!</a>

We are excited to report we are going forward with plans for the Harlan Family in America 2022 Reunion - June 16-19, 2022. We meet annually in the location for the next reunion and we have really enjoyed getting to know and love the Lexington, Kentucky area. We have met some great folks and enjoyed some great times. Now we want to introduce you to the area and let you know what you can expect!

The Hilton Downtown will be the center for all of our activities. Onsite registration will begin Thursday June 16 and there will be a reception Thursday night in the Magnolia Room. The Magnolia Room will serve as registration and the hospitality room during our stay. Hors d'oeuvres and a cash bar and maybe a special guest are on the agenda for Thursday night. We have planned tours of the Horse Country and bourbon tours on Friday and Saturday. In addition, we have several break out sessions planned at the Hilton on Friday and Saturday. As in the past, we culminate the weekend with a banquet and auction of baskets representing the states present at the Reunion.

The Hilton is located in downtown Lexington. There are plenty of activities within walking distance of the Hotel as well as many food venues. Watch for the next newsletter for some ideas on current food venues and restaurants.

There are lots of activities in Lexington outside of the lectures and tours we have planned. Look in this newsletter and the next for ideas for immediate family get-togethers, ideas and activities for children and great choices for food and beverages.