---
title: Celebration 300 - The Tricentennial
cover: logo-300.JPG
no: "300"
newsletter: "Harlan Record No. 1, Winter 1988"
newsletterLink: "/record/record1.pdf"
images:
  - file: "reunion_1987_1.jpg"
  - file: "grist_mill.jpg"
    caption: "The Newlin Grist Mill, built in 1704"
  - file: "300_cabin.jpeg"
    caption: "#14 Joshua Harlan Log House, built around 1715"
  - file: "300_harlan_home.jpg"
    caption: "#14 George Harlan House, built 1724"
---
Celebration 300 started with an idea and a vision. Dan Harlan was living in his retirement home in New Mexico when he received an offer in the mail to purchase a mailing list of Harlans for a nominal sum. Knowing that 1987 would mark the 300th year since George and Michael Harlan landed at New Castle, Delaware, Dan thought that perhaps a national reunion might be possible.

From that vision grew a gathering of Harlans from all corners of the country - from the Pacific to the Atlantic including Hawaii and West Germany. On August 14 - 16, 1987 over 800 people converged on the historical countryside surrounding Wilmington, Delaware. Dan and Mary Ann Harlan were the reunion co-chairs.

The first formal event of the weekend was a filled-to-capacity reception held at the Brandywine River Museum in Chadds Ford, PA. All three floors plus the entryway and courtyard held Harlans, exchanging names and ancestral lines. And perhaps they paused just long enough to appreciate the beautiful art work of three generations of Wyeths.

During the weekend 325 people took the bus tours to view the ancestral grounds of George and Michael. The best stop was at the old log house, an original home of George #3, built about 1690, Harlans lived here for over 200 years. Over time it has been remodeled and added to and now serves as a gracious B & B. Other interesting sites included Centre Meeting where George and his wife Elizabeth Duck Harlan are buried; the stone house built by George #14 where the "star-gazers" stone is located; London Meeting where Michael and his wife Dinah are buried; and Hill Girt Farm, land purchased by George #3 in 1698 and where he lived until his death.

A Saturday afternoon picnic provided the opportunity to get together with family from the same geographic areas, as Regional Coordinators were appointed to help keep a permanent family organization active. This event was held at Battery Park on the banks of the Delaware River where the family could envision George and Michael landing just 300 years ago.

A sit down dinner for 760 people was the main gathering for this celebration. The key note address was given by Dr. John Kern, Director of Historic and Cultural Affairs for Delaware. He was astounded that so many would travel so far to attend. Dr. Kern talked about Harlans in general and then related stories about his favorite Harlans. The program included singing, introductions, recognition and thank you's, a roll call of states, letters of congratulations from President Reagan and Senator Biden, a financial report and finally (when the little ones were asleep under the tables) a slide show of Monkwearmouth. Table favors were 750 individually hand made clay fired vases filled with grasses from Harlan ancestral lands.

The tricentennial activities concluded with memorial services on Sunday, August 16. The services were held in the Old Kennett Meeting House near Chadd's Ford, PA which was built in 1731 on land belong to Ezekiel Harlan, the eldest of George's sons. Because of limited seating, it was necessary to schedule three sessions to accommodate the family. The services were patterned after the "silent meeting" that was observed by Quakers during their early days in America. In those days, members spoke only when so moved by the Holy Spirit, and then the others reflected on what they had said.

From this gathering emerged the permanent Harlan Family in America organization which produces a bi-annual newsletter, **The Harlan Record** to communicate with family members and share information of interest.