---
title: Celebration 310
cover: logo-310.JPG
no: "310"
newsletter: "Harlan Record, No. 12, Summer 1997"
newsletterLink: "/record/record12.htm"
images:
  - file: 310-family.jpg
    caption: 'Harlans posing in front of the Harlan House'
  - file: 310-hotel.jpg
    caption: 'The Harlan Hotel'
  - file: 310-hotel-placard.jpg
    caption: 'Plaque at the Harlan Hotel'
  - file: 310-welcome.jpg
videos: 
 - url: https://player.vimeo.com/video/727482383?h=270a6f33f3
   title: Reunion 310 documentary, part 1
 - url: https://player.vimeo.com/video/727482514?h=0c8bfc1b93
   title: Reunion 310 documentary, part 2
---

Over 500 Harlans gathered in Mt. Pleasant Iowa over the 4th of July weekend in 1997 to celebrate their heritage. Ridge Harlan  and Junior Harlan were the reunion co-chairs. Harlan's came from all corners of the country to get reacquainted with those family members they had met before and to meet more members of their extended family. The citizens of Mt. Pleasant welcomed the Harlan family which has significant history in this small Iowa town. Mt. Pleasant was the home of Senator James Harlan who served in the United States Senate from 1885 to 1887. He also served as Secretary of the Interior under President Lincoln. The Senator's daughter, Mary Eunice married Robert Todd Lincoln, the son of President Abraham Lincoln. The reunion activities opened with a wreath laying ceremony at Senator Harlan's grave site.

The evening of July 3 saw the first large group get together as the family met at St. Alphonsus Catholic Church for a reception followed by dinner. This was an informal gathering and the volume of the voices rose as the evening wore on.

Harlan's continued to pour into town and stopped to register at the hospitality center at the First Presbyterian Church. Here they received a packet of materials, meal tickets and name tags. Once we got our bearings, it was time to look around the room at all the displays on Harlan History, previous reunions, trips to Harlan historical sites and more.

Friday dawned cool and not so clear. We were blessed by cooler weather than normal for a 4th of July in Iowa. This day was spent in a variety of activities in which we were joined by the citizens of Mt. Pleasant. The community opened their renowned Old Thresher Grounds so that we could ride the old steam train on the Midwest Central Railroad, enjoy displays of steam engines and agricultural exhibits as well as the unique Museum of Repertoire Americana. Finally, we celebrated the birth of our nation at the grandstand with musical entertainment and the traditional fireworks.

Workshops were held both on Friday and Saturday to broaden our knowledge of a variety of genealogy subjects from tips for the beginners to using the computer for genealogy research. Throughout the day on Saturday buses took the Harlans around town to visit the sites of particular interest. These included the Harlan home, the Harlan hotel (which was also Senator Harlan's home at one time), and Camp Harlan, a Civil War military training and mustering site.

Saturday evening was the main gathering of the clan and program event. The entertainment included a varied musical program, a recitation of Harlan Family History and a special one-man show with an Iowa Wesleyan College Professor performing a Senator James Harlan.

The reunion concluded on Sunday morning with a moving church service conducted by our own family members including the clergy, organist, pianist, choir and bag piper. As we sang what has become "our" song, "A Family of Friends", we all vowed that we would surely come again.
