---
title: Celebration 315 – Back to Where Our Family Story Began
cover: logo-315.JPG
no: "315"
newsletter: "Harlan Record No. 21, Fall 2002"
newsletterLink: "/record/Record21.htm"
images:
  - file: reunion315_group.jpg
---

Nearly 400 people attended the National Family Reunion in Wilmington, Del. June 27-30, 2002, centered at the Doubletree Hotel.  The events started with registration Thursday afternoon in the hospitality room, followed by a reception at the hotel that evening welcoming familiar faces and met new cousins.  Tours of Harlan family historical sites were offered throughout the morning and afternoon on Friday and Saturday with visits to Centre, London Grove, and Old Kennett Meeting Houses; the Log House, built in 1727 by Joshua Harlan (#13); the stone house built by (#4) George Harlan and occupied by Harlan descendants until 1950;  and the Stargazer Stone near the stone house, which was used to plot the Mason-Dixon line. Bob A. Harlan (PA) and  Mary Harlan Murphy were the reunion co-chairs. 

Many members attended the family picnic at Brandywine Picnic Park from late morning to late afternoon, enjoyed the food, petting zoo, and many rides and activities at the park.  Saturday workshops were:

- How old is that Photograph?
- Fashionable Dress of the Early 19th Century – A Brief View of Costuming From Outside In
- Quaker Heritage of Chester County
- The Harlan-Lincoln Women
- Along the Brandywine River
- Using Alpheus Harlan’s History and Genealogy of the Harlan Family to trace family lines 

A family banquet was held Saturday night. The highlight of the evening of a presentation of Dan Harlan’s play, Some Uncommon Kin: A Celebration of Harlan Family Diversity, which told about several courageous and unusual Harlans.  Nearly three dozen cousins participated in the production, some acting on stage, others reading from backstage, or singing choruses between scenes.  Sunday morning, some cousins attended a Quaker-style silent meditation service at Old Kennett Meeting House, where many Harlan ancestors are buried.  All to quickly, it was time for the final brunch and time to say goodbye and head for home.  