---
title: Celebration 320 - The Great Trek
cover: go-west-logo1.gif
no: "320"
newsletter: "Harlan Record No. 31, Fall 2007"
newsletterLink: "/record/record31.htm"
images:
  - file: reunion_2007_1.jpg
    caption: "Descendants of Leroy Elisha Harlan (#7447) at the reunion picnic. Leroy’s father, Elisha Harlan (#2995) came to California at the age of 8 in the George Harlan wagon train."

---
Over 400 Harlans gathered at John Ascuaga’s Nugget Hotel and Convention Center in Reno, NV., the weekend of July 12-15, 2007 to continue the Harlan Family tradition of celebrating our family history and reconnecting. We learned of the family’s role in the Westward movement of our country.  After registration in the hospitality room, the scheduled events for the weekend began with the Thursday evening welcoming reception hosted by the Harlan Family Association.  It was a perfect time to renew/make friendships. Pat Harrison Fluetsch and William K. Harlan were the reunion co-chairs. 

Friday and Saturday were busy days, with the options of two tours each morning, and/or attending the many workshops offered both days.  The Donner Summit Tour took us to visit the Donner camp site north of Truckee, CA, where some of the Donner Party were trapped in the high snows in the winter of 1846.  The Harlan Wagon Train made it over the summit just prior to the Donners and heavy snowfall.  We then visited Donner Memorial Museum, Monument, and camp site of the other portion of the Donner Party at Donner Lake, west of Truckee.  Our return trip to Reno took us over Donner Summit via old Highway 40, west to the small village of Soda Springs giving us the opportunity to view the rugged terrain experienced by the Harlans on their way to California.  The Virginia City Tour took us to this colorful mining town, where a Harlan ancestor opened one of the first hotels and took part in the great Silver  Rush of the 1860s.  Upon arrival at Virginia City we boarded a trolley to tour the town, visited historic sites and enjoyed a train ride before returning to Reno.

Friday’s mornings workshops gave us the opportunity of Researching our Harlan heritage with particular attention on using Alpheus Harlan’s genealogy book, exploring what happened to the Donners, and learning about Harlan heritage tours which takes us to Ireland and England. In Saturday's morning workshops we learned of the Quaker influence on the Harlan’s and scrapbooking.  In the afternoon we learned about the Harlan DNA project, Harlan’s in Early California, Josiah Harlan, The First American in Afghanistan, Four Marys and a Jessie of the Harlan/Lincoln connection, and the Supreme Court Harlan’s.

The big event Friday afternoon was the traditional family picnic held in the Peavine Pavilion at Rancho San Rafael Park.

Saturday closed the day with the traditional banquet and program given by William K. Harlan, great-great-grandson of George (#852) with slides and narration of the California/Oregon Trail and the Hastings Cutoff route taken by the Harlan Party. William had traveled this route in preparation for this program.  Sunday morning a nondenominational worship service was held followed by a breakfast buffet, time to say goodbye and head home.