---
title: Celebration 325
cover: 2012logo.jpg
no: "325"
newsletter: "Harlan Record No. 41, Fall  2012"
newsletterLink: "/record/record41.pdf"
---
“Let’s connect in Texas” found over 300 Harlans “connecting” with cousins, friends, old and new in San Antonio, Texas at the Marriott Plaza Hotel. The event was held July 5 to July 8, 2012. Our hotel was perfectly located as it was within walking distance of The Riverwalk, The Alamo, and the Tower of the Americas. Ann Whitis and Robert Powers were the reunion co-chairs. 

Activities began on Thursday morning, July 5, with registration and mini reunions of Harlan cousins who had not seen one another since the last reunion in 2007. The highlight of the mini reunions was that of two brothers who had not seen each other for several years and arranged to reconnect in San Antonio. Later Thursday was the reception sponsored by the Harlan Family Organization and held in the historic Marriott courtyard. This was fun and in keeping with the Texas/Mexican tradition, there was a piï¿½ata for the children and strolling Mariachi musicians.

Friday and Saturday were both busy, event filled days. There were two tours offered in the morning each day. One tour included several of the more notable missions in the area and the other was of the Historic King William District. Our guides provided excellent background and information.

In the afternoons of Friday and Saturday, a variety of five workshops were offered; “Early Harlans in the Colonies”, Harlan Genealogy”, “Early Harlans in Texas”, “Harlan and Lincoln Women”, and “The Alamo”. One had to chose as two were offered from 1:15-2:00 and three were offered 2:15-3:00. Following the workshops on Friday was a General Family Meeting. This resembles a brief business meeting and the location of the next reunion is discussed. All attendees are free to ask questions, make comments, etc.

Saturday evening is the Banquet. It is a magnificent sight to witness all the Harlans gathered together in one large room. The Harlans are indeed, “A Family of Friends” which is also the title of our theme song and always sung at the Banquet. This is also the time when awards and special recognitions are announced. Following the program we were offered fantastic Texas style music and dancing, with lessons on the Texas two-step.

On Sunday morning a nondenominational worship service was held followed by a bunch.

For a more detailed write up of the 2012 Harlan San Antonio Reunion, click on “newsletter” in the sidebar listings and read the Fall 2012 issue. Please join the Harlans in Philadelphia July 13 to 16th, 2017 for the next great Harlan reunion. Watch this website for information.

Checkout this story that was posted by [San Antonio Express-News](http://www.mysanantonio.com/default/article/Harlan-family-national-reunion-comes-to-San-3687259.php).

