---
title: The Reunion is ON for 2022!!
cover: Harlan2022Colorlogo.jpg
no: "h"
---

We would like to invite you to Lexington, Kentucky on June 16-19, 2022 for Celebration 335. We have had reunions all over the country since 1987, but we have never had one in the Midwestern/Southern part of the country. Come celebrate with cousins old and new!!

<a href="/2022-reunion-registration.html" class="button">Register now!</a>

Our reunion is being held in the beautiful Hilton Lexington Downtown hotel. The Magnolia room (immediately behind the registration desk) will be our central gathering area and hospitality room, as well as the location for a reception to be held Thursday night. Here you will find the raffle baskets full of items representing various states, the Harlan Store and a great place to gather and meet.

Registration will begin Thursday and continue into Friday. Thursday night we will have a welcoming reception hosted by The Harlan Family in America with hors d’oeuvres and a cash bar. On Friday and Saturday we will have tours in the mornings to either the Horse Country or Bourbon Country. In the afternoons we will offer breakout sessions at the hotel. Topics include DNA research, genealogy research and family history, and a tour of the Mary Todd Lincoln House with a special guest appearance. We are still exploring other topics so keep your eye on the website for updates on the breakout sessions.

We are very excited to have Peter Canellos, the author of The Great Dissenter, the story of John Marshall Harlan, America’s Hero, as a guest speaker Saturday afternoon. Kentuckian and Supreme Court Justice John Marshall Harlan was the most famous dissenter on the Supreme Court. Justice John Marshall Harlan was raised in a slave- owning family with a mixed race brother, Robert Harlan, and became one of the greatest champions of civil rights in the history of the Supreme Court. The book has received much acclaim and we are very excited to have Peter Canellos join us to discuss the life of Justice John Marshall Harlan. And it seems appropriate to have Peter Canellos here to talk about someone who helped lay the foundation for civil rights movement on this Juneteenth weekend. Books will be available for purchase at the session.

To top the weekend off we will have a banquet on Saturday night at the Hilton. The menu is on the registration form and a cash bar will be available. Peter Canellos will open the evening and after dinner we will have drawings for the various baskets offered for raffle.

Before you leave on Sunday we hope you will join us for a traditional Quaker meeting of worship, following the traditions of our forefathers.

We are very excited about the entire long weekend. These events take lots of planning and Covid made planning this reunion particularly difficult. We are excited about Lexington and hope you have followed the newsletters with the abundance of articles about activities around and in Lexington. Those newsletters are available on the website. Talk with your family and make plans to attend! We look forward to seeing you!!!!
We are looking for donations to help defray some of the costs of the reunion. Since we are a non-profit (501-(c) 3) organization, your donation may be tax deductable.

If you are interested in volunteering, putting together a basket for our raffle, presenting a workshop or presenting a display at the reunion please contact Nancy at ngoodingrn@gmail.com or Peggy at hewittgang@sbcglobal.net. We need help with registration, hospitality, workshops, tours and general help.