---
title: Harlan Wagon Train (to California)
---

Submitted by Patty Brown; source unknown

Additional notes following by Steve Harrison

Also read ["The Great Trek and the Golden Opportunity"](/trek), a narrative version of this diary. Click here for a [.pdf version](/docs/The_Great_Trek.pdf).

The numbers in parentheses are from Alpheus Harlan's "History & Genealogy of the Harlan Family".

Departed: October 1845. From: Berrian County, Michigan, with 11 wagons  
People:  
George Harlan ( #852; the wagon master )  
Elizabeth Duncan Harlan ( George's wife )  
Rebecca Harlan Van Gordon ( #2990, married daughter )  
Ira Van Gorden ( husband of Rebecca )  
Mary Harlan Van Gorden ( #2991, married daughter )  
John Van Gorden ( husband of Mary )  
Joel Harlan ( #2992, son )  
Nancy Harlan ( #2994, daughter )  
Elisha Harlan ( #2995, son )  
Jacob Harlan ( #2996, son )  
Mrs. Duncan ( mother-in-law )  
Sarah Harlan ( #2983, niece to George and daughter of Samuel, #851)  
Jacob Wright Harlan ( #2984, nephew to George and son of Samuel )  
Malinda Harlan ( #2985, niece to George and daughter of Samuel )  
George W. Harlan ( #2977, nephew to George and son of William )  
Sarah Johnston Harlan ( sister-in-law to George and Widow of William, #850 )  
William Harlan Jr. ( #2979, nephew of George and son of William )  

St. Claire, Illinois: Fowler Party joined  
People:  
Catherine Speed Fowler ( mother )  
William Fowler ( son )  
Ann Eliza Fowler ( daughter )  
Minerva Jane Fowler ( daughter )  
Catherine Fowler Hargrave ( married daughter )  
John Hargrave ( husband of Catherine ) 

December 1, 1845: Arrived at Lexington, Missouri and spent the winter. Here Sarah Harlan ( niece to George and daughter of Samuel ) married her cousin George W. Harlan ( nephew to George and son of William )

Spring 1846: Peter Wimmer ( brother-in-law to George Harlan Wagon Master ) joined the wagon train with his new wife ( he had been widowed ) Elizabeth Jane Cloud.

Independence, Missouri: The wagon train went there to join 500 other wagons in the spring of 1846.

April 6, 1846: The wagons started out. The Ex-Governor Boggs of Missouri was the leader. The Donner Party was also a part of this train.

Fort Laramie, Wyoming: It was here that Langsford Hastings ( a guide ) persuaded 3 groups of the big train to go to Fort Bridger, Wyoming, and take a short cut that would save them 300 miles.

The three parties went with Hastings:

1. A pack train led by Bryant and guided by Hudspeth ( a partner of Hastings)
2. Harlan-Young Party with 66 wagons.
3. The Donner Party.

July 23, 1846: Fort Bridger, Wyoming. Harlan-Young party left for cutoff, ahead of Donner Party

July 31, 1846: Donner Party left for cutoff. The Bryant Party had left before both of the others.

Weber Canyon, Utah: Upon reaching the cutoff Bryant sent back a note urging all who followed to avoid this route. Neither the Harlan-Young nor the Donner Parties received this note.

When the Harlan-Young train reached the head of Weber Canyon in the Wasatch Mountains of Utah they "ran into a stone wall". The going was extremely difficult and at some points the shoulders thrusting into the gorge were so steep the wagons had to be lifted over by windlass and rope.

Hastings left a note at the entrance of the canyon to urge the Donner Party not to follow but to ride ahead and find a better route.

Reed upon reading the note, rode to find a new route and waiting for him cost the Donner Party more time.

Salt Lake Valley: When the Harlan-Young Party finally made it through the Wasatch Mountains they then had to cross the desert. They went 90 miles with no water. John Hargrave died on this part of the journey. William Fowler lost 7 yoke of oxen, and most of the livestock on the train perished from lack of water. Two years later the Mormons from Illinois followed this route to Salt Lake. The Harlan-Young wagon train was the first to cross that desert. They left all the wagons but three and hitched all the oxen to these. They found water in another 20 miles then went back for the other wagons.

Humbolt River: Upon reaching this point George Harlan sent Jacob Wright Harlan and Tom Smith ahead to Sutter's Fort for food and fresh animals.

Jacob and two Indians returned with provisions and met the train on the Truckee River. Tom Smith had joined Fremont's Army.

October 25, 1846: The Harlan-Young Party reached Johnson's Rancho near Sacramento. They arrived several weeks behind the Boggs Party, but they were the last train to cross the Sierras that winter.

The Donner Party: They had been delayed at the Wasatch Mountains in Utah and when they attempted to cross the Sierra Mountains, they were caught in the snow and were forced to spend the winter in the mountains.

Destination Mission Santa Clara: The Harlan Party sent their women and children by boat down the Sacramento River to Alviso and the men took the wagons by land. The boat trip was very rough as a storm blew up. They reached Yerba Buena, as San Francisco was called then, and went ashore. Later they went back to the boat and continued to Alviso. It took nine days to make the boat trip. The woman spent one night in Alviso then went on to the Mission Santa Clara the next day. In a few days the men arrived with the wagons.

December 1846: Two weeks after arriving at Mission Santa Clara John Van Gordon ( husband of Mary Harlan ) and Elizabeth Duncan Harlan ( wife of George Harlan the Wagon Master ) died of Typhoid Fever.

Jacob Wright Harlan enlists in the army under Fremont. He remained in until April 1847.

Spring 1847: George Harlan moved to Mission San Jose with his widowed daughter, Mary Van Gordon, and his mother-in-law, Mrs. Duncan. There he started a dairy with the cows that survived the trek to California.

August 1, 1847: George Harlan ( wagon master ) married Catherine Fowler Hargrave and moved to Napa Valley.

1847: Captain Henry C. Smith married Mary Ann Harlan Van Gordon and moved to the Oakland Hills where Henry was whip-sawing lumber in the Redwoods. Mrs. Duncan also went with them. Henry C. Smith had been recruited into the Army in Ohio in 1845 and had crossed the plains on horseback with a pack train.

Jacob Wright Harlan, George W. Harlan and George Harlan ( wagon master ) were also in the Oakland Hills cutting redwood shingles and fence posts for the village of Yerba Buena ( soon to be called San Francisco )

George W. Harlan and his wife Sarah opened a hotel, The Fremont, in the wilds of Santa Clara.

Jacob and Joel Harlan then went to San Francisco where they operated a livery stable until 1848.

March 1848: Jacob Wright Harlan and Joel Harlan opened a General Store in Coloma. Gold was struck there that spring so the brothers made a lot of money selling supplies to the miners.

April 1848: Julia Smith was born to Mary and Henry Smith in Oakland.

Summer 1848: Smiths move to Coloma to mine for gold.

August 1848: George and Catherine Harlan also moved to Coloma for the gold.

Winter 1848: Smiths moved to San Francisco with $8,000 that they had mined during the summer.

April 2, 1849: Joel Harlan married Minerva Jane Fowler in Sonoma.

1849: Mrs. Duncan, mother-in-law of George Harlan the wagon master, died at 93 years old. She had come across by wagon train two years before.

1849: Henry C. Smith was named First Justice of the Peace at Mission San Jose.

1849: Nancy Harlan, daughter of George Harlan, married Lucien Huff.

1849: Jacob and Joel sold the General Store in Coloma to Langsford Hastings (the guide ) and the brothers went gold mining but returned to San Francisco to dairy with George Harlan, wagon master. They were getting $4.00 a gallon for milk.

1849: Jacob Wright Harlan sold a " Worthless " lot on Bush Street in San Francisco, so called because it was simply sand hills and greasewood bushes, to Dr. Coit and two partners for $2500.00. Known as Coit Towers today.

February 9, 1850: Emma Smith was born to Mary and Henry Smith at Mission San Jose.

May 1850: Nancy Huff had a daughter, Dena Huff, at Mission San Jose.

Summer of 1850: George Harlan, wagon master, died of typhoid fever at the Mission San Jose. He was 48 years old.

1850: Elisha Harlan, son of George Harlan, wagon master, went to live with his brother Joel Harlan in San Francisco.

1850-1852: Jacob and Joel Harlan and their families farmed potatoes at the mouth of San Lorenzo Creek.

1851: Henry Smith went by way of the Isthmus of Panama to New York and on to St. Joseph, Missouri, to see his family.

1852: Jacob Wright Harlan and William J. Harlan also went to New York via the Isthmus of Panama. Jacob went on to Indiana to his family. William Fowler went to Iowa.

1852: Joel and Minerva Harlan moved to a 1,000 acre ranch Joel bought in the Amador Valley. Elisha Harlan, brother of Joel, also went with them.

1852: Henry C. Smith was elected to the California State Legislature from Santa Clara county. The state capital was at that time in Benicia. He introduced the bill creating Alameda County.

1853: Smiths moved to Alvarado, California.

1853: Jacob W. Harlan is in Indiana where he and his brother George and cousin

William buy 306 head of cattle and horses and set off for California. They again take the Weber Canyon cutoff and arrive in California with 189 head of livestock.

1853: Jacob then ran the Slocum's Ferry near Stockton and raised livestock in many places in California. He eventually ended up in an Old Soldiers Home, destitute except for his Army Pension.

1855: Henry Smith was elected one of the first Supervisors of Alameda County.

1856: Joel Harlan and his family moved to the Norris Tract in Danville where Joel added 800 more acres to his ranch. He also built a two-story house called " El Nido " that still remains with his descendants today, being Mrs. Al Geldermann. The house is a museum in Danville.

1856: Nancy Harlan Huff died.

May 7, 1858: William J Harlan and Nancy Randall marry in Iowa.

1860: Elisha Harlan left his brother Joel's ranch in San Ramon and went to Fresno County where he spent nine years buying and selling livestock near Kingston.

1861: Smiths moved to Nevada where they operated hotels.

March 31, 1863: William J. Harlan, who, as a small child came across the plains with the Harlan-Young Wagon Train, later returned to Iowa, married and had a family, now leaves Iowa with his wife and family in a wagon train for California again. His train consists of:
Nancy Randall Harlan ( William's wife )  
Charles A. Harlan ( son )  
George W. Harlan ( son )  
Andrew J. Harlan ( son )  
Elias Draper ( half brother to William )  
Mrs. Hobaugh Draper ( wife of Elias )  
Lucy Hobaugh ( daughter of Mrs. Hobaugh Draper )  

They arrived in San Lorenzo in late 1863.

1865: Smiths return to California from Nevada and live in Oakland.

1868: Smiths purchase a farm of 160 acres in Livermore.

1869: Elisha Harlan homesteads 160 acres 25 miles south of Fresno. He added by purchase until he owned 700 acres.

September 14, 1871: Elisha Harlan married Lucy Hobaugh. Lucy Hobaugh was Riverdale's first Postmistress. The ranch still remains in the family, and a grandson, John Jerome Harlan, Jr., lives there.

Additions and corrections are welcome. Please send to Ruth Harlan Lamb (harlamb@aol.com)

**Note:** Katherine Grey has written two books that chronicle this period of history: "Rolling Wheels", about wagon trains going west and the hardships endured; and "Hills of Gold", the story of the discovery of gold in California. The books may be out of print, so if anyone knows of a source, please put the information on the Harlan message board.

******************************

Some additional notes from Steve Harrison, son of a Harlan, who has been researching the Harlan family for over 30 years .

1. "Summer of 1850: George Harlan..died of typhoid fever..."
George Harlan died on July 8, 1850.

2. "1856: Nancy Harlan Huff died"
Nancy died December 12, 1856.

3. "September 14, 1871: Elisha Harlan... The ranch still remains in the family, and a grandson, John Jerome Harlan, Jr. lives there."
Jerome died on February 9, 2002. I suggest rewriting the sentence to read: "The ranch remains in the family. Elisha's grandson, John Jerome Harlan, Jr. lived there until his death on February 9, 2002."

4. There is a note at the end about the books by Katherine Grey. For clarification, it should be stated that her books are works of fiction, probably geared toward young adult readers. They are both out of print.