---
title: The Charles Wesley Harlan Story
---
Nebraska Homesteader and Bricklayer (son of James Nelson Harlan #9295), based on the recollections of his son, Clarence Haller Harlan (9-14-1885—1966)

Submitted by Howard Harlan, grandson of Clarence Haller Harlan

My father, Charles Wesley Harlan (b.11-2-1854— d.10-30-1926), having lived and worked in cities and towns during his 26 years, became infected with the land hunger prevalent in the eastern portion of the United States about 1880. He and Mary Elizabeth Haller had been married in a Lutheran Church on Union Street, Allegheny, Pennsylvania, across from the park in 1882.

In 1885, C. W. made a trip to east-central Nebraska where the government was offering free land to homesteaders who would agree to live on the land for five years. The railroad brought him to Sargent, Nebraska, where he hired a horse and rig and drove into the area of the Middle Loup River near Westcott. He paid the $5 registration fee and was granted 160 acres of land, four miles from Westcott. He then returned to Allegheny to await a propitious time to make the move to Nebraska.

In March of 1886, Howard Malcolm (brother) was almost three years of age, and I was six months old. We left at that time by railroad for the West. Mother had packed hampers of food for the three day trip. She was almost 24 years of age at the time and was leaving her large family and her friends for a life on the prairie where her nearest neighbor would be one-half mile away.

My father built a “soddie”, cutting slabs of sod two feet long, one foot wide and four inches thick from the prairie. The walls of the house were two feet thick. Branches of cottonwood trees were used for roof rafters, and sod was laid on them with the grassy side up. The house had two rooms. Window glass, frames for doors and windows, sash and one door were purchased. The 
house was warm in winter and cool in summer. Some settlers used paper dipped in lard for windowpanes.

For some time after our arrival there was no pig pen or barn. Dad dug a cave in a small rise to house the pigs and placed a fence around the opening. Shortly after this a prairie fire ravaged the area. Dad set a back fire around the house, as the prairie grass was several feet high. The pigs lost most of their hair in the fire, as they were curious to see what was going on and did not remain in the cave.  We had a cow at the time and brought her into the house to save her life.

Dad was a brickmason and, after spring plowing and planting, went to Broken Bow or Omaha to work at his trade. He was away from the farm from three to six months at a time.

There was an Indian trail crossing the northwest corner of our land. It was not uncommon for the Sioux, singly or in small groups, to use this trail and at times, to come to the house asking for food. Mother, trembling inwardly, would order them to sit outside the house and bring food to them.

Dad dug a well near the house and found excellent water at a depth of 30 feet. The soil was dark, sandy loam. He found one small pebble during the digging. He carried this pebble as a pocketpiece since he found no other stones or pebbles on the place during his five years residence there. 

When Howard was about four years old, he found a jar in the barn containing a white powder and ate some of it. Mother noticed some of the powder on his clothing and asked where he got it. When he showed her, she found that the jar contained arsenic, used by Dad on occasion for the animals. Mother dissolved some of her home-made soap in lukewarm water and made him swallow it. She then hitched up the team and drove four miles to the doctor in Westcott.  After the doctor examined Howard, he said she had saved his life by giving him the emetic promptly.

Mother had a garden in an abandoned corral which was reached by steps cut into the earth, as the bottom of the corral was some 20 feet below the level on which the house stood. The garden was several hundred feet distant from the house.

In 1988 my sister, Marion, was born in the sod house. One day, when Marion was still quite small, I was looking after her not far from the house when a bull snake (not poisonous) crawled to within a few feet of her. I ran to the top of the garden steps and called Mother who came and killed the snake, which measured about five feet in length. 

Dad’s brother, Percy, then about 18, came to visit us and stayed with us for several weeks. He loved to hunt. One November day when he was hunting for jackrabbits several miles from our house, it began to snow so heavily that he had to find shelter in a strawstack. The storm turned into a blizzard which raged all night. Luckily for him, the temperature did not drop much below freezing so, when the blizzard had blown itself out next morning, he found his way back to our house. Many a man in a similar predicament had frozen to death because of a severe drop in temperature.

We had two dogs in Nebraska—a mastiff named Major and a small pug dog named Beppo. Major was a one-man dog and would not permit a stranger to come near the house. 

One of our neighbors, an Englishman named Emanuel Smith, was coarse and brutal. He had advertised in England for a wife. When her ship arrived in New York, Mr. Smith met her and brought her to his homestead. Mother said the woman was a half-wit, but harmless. Her husband was accustomed to hitching her with a horse to his plow and beat her when she displeased him.

Another of our neighbors, Mr. Hemming, had several boys. It was his custom to hitch his team to a rough wagon, take the boys along, and scout the area for fence posts or other loose pieces of wood on his neighbors’ land, which he might use for firewood. Timber was one of the scarcest articles on the prairies.

Major, very early, began to detest Smith and Hemming, and they dared not come near the house until Dad had tied him.

Mr. Walter Henderson, who lived one-half mile from us, was a fine neighbor and proved himself a real friend. There were many things to be learned about the prairie if one wished to stay alive and healthy.

After living in Nebraska five years, as we were about to leave, Dad gave the dogs to Mr. Henderson. Beppo became attached to his new home, but Major ran away repeatedly and would lie at our door where he finally died of grief and starvation. 

When Dad would be working away from home, the entire responsibility of the family and homestead devolved upon Mother. In addition, the mournful winds—which in some months blew constantly—added to the feeling of lonesomeness. After five years in Custer County, Mother decided that she had had enough of frontier life. The family returned to western Pennsylvania, 
living one year in Saxonbury, Butler County; then removing to Millvale in Allegheny County where they spent the remainder of their years.

Note:   Oldest son Howard Malcolm Harlan died at the age of 11 of typhoid-pneumonia. 
Son Clarence Haller Harlan, who wrote this account, went on to become a civil engineer, graduating in 1906 from Western University of Pennsylvania. He married Janette Marshall in 1910, and the couple had three children: Agnes Elizabeth, Howard Marshall and Lois Janette. Clarence spent 40 years in the fabricated steel business with McClintoc-Marshall Construction Company, which later was sold to Bethlehem Steel Corporation. While at McClintoc-Marshall, 
Clarence worked on the Panama Canal plans. Under Bethlehem Steel, he was the sales person who successfully bid the Golden Gate Bridge.

Other children of Charles Wesley Harlan and Mary Elizabeth Haller Harlan: Marion Blair, Ralph Kenneth (died at age 18 months of scarlet fever), Harold Lester, Ruth Mildred and Kenneth Nelson. 