The association would like to express our gratitude to all who have donated to the Harlan Family in America over the years. We could not exist without your generous support.

In September 2015, the IRS recognized the association for exemption from federal income tax under IRC section 501(c)3. Donors may be eligible to deduct contributions made to the Harlan Family in America Association under IRC Section 170.

Our semiannual newsletter lists our treasurer's report, but we would like to provide you more information on how your donations are used. Our largest expense each year is publication of *The Harlan Record*. The cost of printing and mailing it runs around $1,500 per issue. We mail over 1700 newsletters, plus send electronically to about 300. We are always looking for more recipients, and to increase the number who would like to receive the newsletter electronically by email, in order to save on printing and postage.

One of our goals is to preserve our common family heritage. Each year we give support to the HarlanLincoln House in Mt. Pleasant, IA. In the past we have also donated to St. Peter's Church in Monkwearmouth, England where George (#3) was baptized in 1650; to All Hallows Church in Sutton Park, England where many Harlands worshiped and are buried; Old Kennett and Centre Meeting Houses in Pennsylvania where George and Michael (#4) worshiped and are buried; plus other programs and places over the years. The association is a member of the Chester County Historical Society where many of our Harlan records are stored. Other expenses render a post office box and petty cash account to cover additional mailings and expenses. The last item in the treasurer's report is the annual meeting of the Board. Members of the board pay for their own travel and lodging expenses to these meetings. The association covers only the cost of lunch on the day of the meeting. A large portion of our funds are used for the national reunions held every five years, to help defray expenses for the attendees.

We hope this provides everyone with more information on how your donations are used. Again, our heartfelt gratitude to all for the support you give to the Harlan Family in America Association. If you have any questions, please contact our treasurer via [HarlanFamilyinAmerica@gmail.com](mailto:HarlanFamilyinAmerica@gmail.com).